_drafts/torii.md, before:

---
layout: single
title:  "Torii"
header:
  teaser: "torii.jpg"
categories: 
  - Medicine
tags:
  - medicine
---

Hello, World!


The Tori-i gate is a symbol in Japan for the boundary between the Sacred and the Profane.

Medicine has made me question whether such a sharp distinction exists, as the physician must step between these worlds constantly.

In my undergrad, I felt assured that my study of physics and mathematics was sacred. Pursuit of these did not involve memorization, but monkish meditation on a few fundamental concepts and the application of Divine logic. Zen koans = quantum mechanics and abstract algebra.

Compared to this, medical knowledge seemed at once Profane. Consisting mostly of memorization of arbitrary facts, relying often on…colorful…mnemonics.

Understanding of abstruse biochemical pathways is a prerequisite to helping a child with a genetic metabolic disease, a Sacred endeavor. Is knowledge required to perform this, then, not sacred itself? But how can memorizing a song about the urea cycle be sacred?

An ailing person might acquire C. difficile diarrhea, known for its awful smell. How much more Profane can you get, as you perform the Sacred task of healing.

All knowledge is Sacred.




Okay, it's 11/20 and we are writing this.

Okay, my thinking was about the surprising sacredness of medical knowledge and my journey to discovering this.


---


![Tori-i Gate](images/torii-1.jpg)

> This is a *tori-i* gate, often seen in front of Japanese Shinto temples.
> It represents the boundary between the Sacred world inside the temple and the Profane world outside.


When I started college, I didn't know what I wanted to do, so I pursued physics and mathematics.
After all, *that's* the Secret Sauce.

>*Learn these Sacred arts, and all the machinations of the world will appear before you and be known to you.*

I thought that if I spent my time learning these disciplines, which seemed at the source of everything else, that I would be prepared for any other venture I wanted to get into down the road.
They were about understanding grander concepts, not mere memorization of random facts like in biology class.
The insights I would gain from this were profound and universal - and the structure of the knowledge reflected that.
The claims made were true all over the universe, and we were learning the full stack: from fundamental set theory to complex theorems and from the vibrations of atoms to the motions of galaxies.
The things I learned in physics and mathematics were magical, and still are!

The geometry of vector calculus.
The rigid creativity of formal logic and mathematical proofs.
The magic of partial differentials in Thermodynamics.
Fourier transforms and Louiville's theorem.
The unabashed nessecity (?) of Electrodynamics.
The formless shapes of Abstract Algebra.

The laws and formulae I learned guided the motion of the tiniest particle and largest galaxy along with every school bus, egret, lodestone, Cambodian, silicon wafer, Barbie doll, bacteriophage, and Chicago deep dish pizza in history.
This knowledge was obviously *Sacred*.

This is all in stark contrast to silly biology classes.
I took some in high school and, at my parents' behest, a couple more in college to keep the door to med school open.
It was all the same:
The statistical noise of which plants, animals, and proteins happened to inhabit the earth at the present moment was crammed into a few dozen poorly-formatted powerpoint slides.


Yes, there were some patterns but they were so many random facts that students had to come up with funny acronyms as mnemonic devices.
We had [mnemonic](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/mnemonic) devices to learn things in physics too - it was called *understanding*.



It was all the same - some squiggly little thing was misrecognized as something else a good 50 years ago and 

Memorizing the names of bacteria (or that "G-protein coupled receptors" had specifically *7* transmembrane domains) was *woefully* pedestrian.



As I turned toward medicine, I still kept my same smug attitude

Commit message:

worked on Torii m,ore but it's not yet done

_drafts/torii.md, after:

---
layout: single
title:  "Torii"
header:
  teaser: "torii.jpg"
categories: 
  - Medicine
tags:
  - medicine
---

Hello, World!


The Tori-i gate is a symbol in Japan for the boundary between the Sacred and the Profane.

Medicine has made me question whether such a sharp distinction exists, as the physician must step between these worlds constantly.

In my undergrad, I felt assured that my study of physics and mathematics was sacred. Pursuit of these did not involve memorization, but monkish meditation on a few fundamental concepts and the application of Divine logic. Zen koans = quantum mechanics and abstract algebra.

Compared to this, medical knowledge seemed at once Profane. Consisting mostly of memorization of arbitrary facts, relying often on…colorful…mnemonics.

Understanding of abstruse biochemical pathways is a prerequisite to helping a child with a genetic metabolic disease, a Sacred endeavor. Is knowledge required to perform this, then, not sacred itself? But how can memorizing a song about the urea cycle be sacred?

An ailing person might acquire C. difficile diarrhea, known for its awful smell. How much more Profane can you get, as you perform the Sacred task of healing.

All knowledge is Sacred.




Okay, it's 11/20 and we are writing this.

Okay, my thinking was about the surprising sacredness of medical knowledge and my journey to discovering this.


---


![Tori-i Gate](images/torii-1.jpg)

> This is a *tori-i* gate, often seen in front of Japanese Shinto temples.
> It represents the boundary between the Sacred world inside the temple and the Profane world outside.


When I started college, I didn't know what I wanted to do, so I pursued physics and mathematics.
After all, *that's* the Secret Sauce.

>*Learn these Sacred arts, and all the machinations of the world will appear before you and be known to you.*

I thought that if I spent my time learning these disciplines, which seemed at the source of everything else, that I would be prepared for any other venture I wanted to get into down the road.
They were about understanding grander concepts, not mere memorization of random facts like in biology class.
The insights I would gain from this were profound and universal - and the structure of the knowledge reflected that.
The claims made were true all over the universe, and we were learning the full stack: from fundamental set theory to complex theorems and from the vibrations of atoms to the motions of galaxies.
The things I learned in physics and mathematics were magical, and still are!

The geometry of vector calculus.
The rigid creativity of formal logic and mathematical proofs.
The magic of partial differentials in Thermodynamics.
Fourier transforms and Louiville's theorem.
The unabashed nessecity (?) of Electrodynamics.
The formless shapes of Abstract Algebra.

The laws and formulae I learned guided the motion of the tiniest particle and largest galaxy along with every school bus, egret, lodestone, Cambodian, silicon wafer, Barbie doll, bacteriophage, and Chicago deep dish pizza in history.
This knowledge was obviously *Sacred*.

This is all in stark contrast to silly biology classes.
I took some in high school and, at my parents' behest, a couple more in college to keep the door to med school open.
It was all the same:
The statistical noise of which plants, animals, and proteins happened to inhabit the earth at the present moment was crammed into a few dozen poorly-formatted powerpoint slides.


Yes, there were some patterns but they were so many random facts that students had to come up with funny acronyms as mnemonic devices.
We had [mnemonic](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/mnemonic) devices to learn things in physics too - it was called *understanding*.



And don't get me started on the naming - some squiggly little thing was misrecognized as something else a good 50 years ago and we all were stuck with the baggage

Compared to the elegant, universal laws of my college concentrations, memorizing the names of bacteria (or that "G-protein coupled receptors" had specifically *7* transmembrane domains) was *woefully* pedestrian.
Profane.



Alas, as I neared the end of my undergraduate, I ended up steering towards medical school.
I respected the work my physics professors did.
While they were definitely pushing our understanding of the physical world around us, though, the niche topics they focused on felt a bit too distant from the real-world challenges around me.
I wanted my impact to be in a more person-facing role, even if that meant giving up any chance to invent nuclear fusion or room temperature superconductivity or some other technology that would have far more postive impact than an individual clinician could.



As I turned toward medicine, I still kept my same smug attitude regarding the divine hierarchy of knowledge.

And boy, what we learned in the first couple years of med school was even more cursed than premed biology.
Some highlights:
- If you come to the emergency room with an inflamed pancreas, your doctor is mentally running through the possible causes with the acryonym "I GET PPSMASHED".
- Toll-like receptors in your cells help detect disease-causing microbes. They do not resemble toll booths, though, but instead derive their name from their German discoverer thinking they looked "cool", or, in German, "toll".
- Do you know what the drug ustekizumab does? Pembrolizumab? Ipilimumab? (Okay, there was *some* effort put into a [naming convention](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nomenclature_of_monoclonal_antibodies) for monclonal antibodies)
- Diabetes mellitus (normal diabetes) and diabetes insipidus are totally different problems in the body. Basically the only similarity they have is they cause you to pee a lot, grouping both conditions under the name "diabetes", meaning "siphon" in Greek. Oh, by the way, one distinguishing feature between them is that you have high sugar in your urine in diabetes *mellitus* ("sweet") and low urine sugar in diabetes *insipidus* ("tasteless")


It gets to the point where we use a computer flashcard program called Anki to flip through hundreds (some classmates averaged thousands) of cards a day.
Anki is a (very clever!) spaced repitition software that keeps showing you cards where you failed to guess the answer and saves the ones you're comfortable with for later.
So you try to "understand" the slides for a bit but then you just start ripping through the Anki deck, trying to guess the blank word in the sentence before flipping to the back and seeing that the answer was *Staphylococcus epidermidis*, not *Staphylococcus saprophyticus*.
(Duh!)
We're basically beaming knowledge into our heads with Factoid Peekaboo for hours every day because there's not a better way to learn this stuff.



It's very annoying to remember that you must avoid aspirin in children due to risk of Reye's syndrome unless they have a blood vessel disease known as Kawasaki disease (not the blood vessel disease called Takayasu arteritis, of course).
However, this becomes far less of a bother when a concerned parent has brought in their toddler with a persistent fever and skin peeling from their fingers and they look to you.
Then, the
